The RefOG is rooted on the Nematostella vectensis (Cnidaria) gene.

The orthogroup is well demarcated in the tree (v1) by genes from the outgroup species Nematostella vectensis & Trichoplax adhaerens. It has been rooted at the base of this larger metazoan-orthogroup. The inferred tree supports the orthogroup membership from the original study with updated gene models. 

However, genes could have potentially been incorrectly excluded by the e-value threshold for inclusion so a new tree (v2) with all hits better than or equal to 0.01 were included. No trimming was used on the MSA. This tree, with 46 genes rather than 24, presents a more complex picture. As before the main clade back to Ciona intestinalis is well-supported. Also, as for the v1 tree the evidence supports Drosophila_melanogaster_FBpp0297348 also being a member of the bilaterian-level orthogroup. The genes that are less clear are Gallus_gallus_ENSGALP00000073380 and the three C. elegans genes. 

The v1 tree provides a clear picture with the two Trichoplax genes as the outgroup &  two Nematostella genes diverging next, as expected. The C. elegans genes are in a clade with the Schistosoma mansoni genes, as expected and EDO37889 appears to just be slightly displaced in the tree. 

Looking at the unrooted v2 tree, it two clear clades. One involves the target orthogroup and also stretches back to the Nematostella and Trichoplax genes. The other is distant & includes ENSP00000367459 with similar species representation. Between these two clades are a number of genes on long branches and in no biologically expected tree topology. Are these spurious, false positive homologs or are the part of the gene family? And correctly placed in the tree? The position of the C. elegans genes in relation to the Nematostella & Trichoplax genes suggests they are not part of the orthogroup, with at least 70% bootstrap support. This is also in agreement with the v1 tree once it is rooted as per the v2 tree (which has more information as to the root). Conversely, Gallus_gallus_ENSGALP00000073380 appears to be part of the orthogroup. Both of these decision are with only moderate confidence.
