The RefOG tree is unrooted. It appears to show 3 bilaterian orthogroups that have been incorrectly identified as a single orthogroup. Each of these has a C. elegans gene, which is from the first diverging clade within the orthogroup thus showing the duplications occurred before the root of each orthogroup. It has been rooted on one of these orthogroups.

The newly inferred tree (v1) contains a number of metazoan orthogroups from the wider gene family. It has been rooted on a well-defined case which has outgroup genes from Trichoplax & Nematostella, and 100% bootstrap support. This is not to say that this is the actual root of the tree, but it does guarantee that the root is correctly positioned outside the target orthogroup and so the target orthogroup is correctly depicted in the rooted tree. 

Interestingly, this tree does not have C. elegans genes delineating each of these three orthogroups, possibly because of updated gene models (but the genes appeared correct in the tree from the original study) or missed genes in this study. A manual search for missing C. elegans genes has been conducted and a tree focusing on just the clade of the genes in question plus close outgroup (to aid rooting) has been inferred. This outgroup clade was selected from the initial tree. The C. elegans gene in the tree from the original study and missing from the newly inferred tree is T14E8.1a. The updated ID for this gene is WBGene00020504. In fact, this gene is in the newly inferred tree but if shown, with 83% bootstrap support, to be a member of the bilaterian orthogroup containing Homo_sapiens_ENSP00000431885. I.e. the orthogroup selected to be the outgroup for the new tree. Returning to the initial inferred tree from this study, it presents good evidence that this C. elegans gene belongs to that orthogroup. I'll return to the second tree soon.

Given this, the RefOG tree was re-rooted on the C. elegans gene, given the good evidence that it is an outgroup to all the remaining genes in the tree. This still shows there to be three bilaterian orthogroups of which two have representatives from the Protostomes and Deuterostomes and one only has Deuterostomes.

The second, more focused tree (v2) inferred for this study confirms that the RefOG from the original study is in fact 3 bilaterian orthogroups. The orthogroup containing Homo_sapiens_ENSP00000478721 has been chosen as the representative for the benchmark as it is the most clearly defined.
