The original RefOG consists entirely of genes from Drosophila and so there was no extra information that could be used to root it.

It was found that progressively wider reaching trees were required to correctly interpret this orthogroup. In these trees it was eventually found that the orthogroup was of quite limited extent, as found in the original study, although it was found in this new study that there were also genes from C. elegans in the orthogroup:


Inferred Tree v1: 
The tree shows clearly that these genes are part of a large gene family that has duplicated frequently in other species in addition to the Duplications identified in Drosophila in the original study. The correct rooting of the tree is non-trivial since it contains a number of metazoan-orthogroups each with a selection of genes from the outgroup species used in this study. The branch lengths give quite a clear delineation of a number of these orthogroups (view the tree as a radial phylogram and highlight all the outgroup genes to see this). The target orthogroup is the most divergent within the gene family and the most challenging to analyse. The tree has been rooted on a well-defined metazoan level orthogroup. This orthogroup has genes from Trichoplax adhaerens, Nematostella vectensis and the ingroup species. The inspection of the tree shows that rooting on any of the clear metazoan-orthogroups should allow the target clade to be analysed correctly (since the root will be correctly placed with respect to all the genes of interest). The rooting will be re-evaluated again at the end of the analysis to ensure that other possible rootings have no effect on the interpretation of the target orthogroup.

The tree shows clearly a metazoan-orthogroup that encompasses the target bilaterian-orthogroup (the clade containing 131 genes & with 87% bootstrap support). It contains early-diverging clades of genes from Mnemiopsis leidyi & Trichoplax adhaerens. It is not clear if the branch from the other orthogroups correct roots this Metazoan-orthogroup since an alternative rooting (version_2) is more parsimonious. Nevertheless, both this tree and the version_2 tree show strong evidence that there was a gene duplication event prior to the origin of the orthogroup that gave rise to the target orthogroup (only in the Protostomes & Branchiostoma) and a sister orthogroup (in the Protostomes and Deuterostomes). The bootstrap support is high for this and there are many genes confirming this (from C. elegans, Drosophila, Branchiostoma & Schistosoma). This confirms part of the original study, in excluding and vertebrate species from the orthogroup, but identified that there are many more C. elegans and Drosophila genes that are also part of the orthogroup. The question of rooting, raised above, does not alter this interpretation.
