The RefOG tree has two genes from outgroup species, it is rooted on one of these.

The inferred tree contains genes from the wider gene family. Its interpretation is not immediately apparent. The target orthogroup appears to be well-defined and bounded by a number of genes from the outgroup species. Nevertheless, other parts of the tree contain genes that don't fit well into expected clades and could potentially not be homologous. Although these genes may not be affecting the orthogroup of interest (which appears to be well resolved), a new tree with a more careful selection method for genes was used (the previous tree had a worst hit gene to the hmm profile of 0.0072).

A new tree was inferred a tree with 1.5x the number of genes as passed the e-value threshold as for the original RefOG tree so as to include the gene family context of the orthogroup. Thus:
47 genes in original tree, e-value of worst hit for profile was 3e-77. 69 genes from the new study had a hit better than or equal to this, selected the best 1.5x69 = 103 gene hits, with a worst hit to the hmm profile with a e-value of 1.8e-32 for being homologous.

The newly inferred tree contains a clade with a large expansion in gene copy number in C. elegans and Drosophila. These appear to be from outside the orthogroup. The tree has been rooted on the clade that contains the only three Mnemiopsis genes (a Ctenophore and the earliest diverging species in the tree) together with a single Drosophila gene. There is no clade containing only Mnemiopsis and no bipartition that appears to be a more ancient duplication, so this appears to be the best root for the tree. The Drosophila/C. elegans expansion appears to be from a separate orthogroup that doesn't retain any representatives from the Deuterostomes. The target orthogroup contains a clade of (outgroup) Nematostella genes diverging near its root and separating the orthogroup from this Drosophila/C. elegans expansion. There is also a pair of C. elegans & Drosophila genes which appear to be the representatives from the target orthogroup even though the topology does not match that expected for the species (these early branches are hard to resolve with single gene trees, as shown by many of the trees within this study). There is 98% bootstrap support for these genes belonging to the wider pre-bilateria orthogroup. This analysis supports the orthogroup inferred in the original study.
