The RefOG tree is rooted on a Hydra magnipapillata gene although this is on a long branch and so the branch may not root the tree accurately.

The newly inferred tree shows three metazoan orthogroups in the gene family. It has been rooted at the base of the metazoan orthogroup for the target genes. This metazoan orthogroup is largely consistent with the original RefOG tree. As with the RefOG tree from the original study it contains earlier diverging genes within the clade identified as the orthogroup in the original study (Drosophila & Nematostella in this tree, Drosophila & C. elegans in the original RefOG tree).

If these genes are correctly placed then the clades contain two orthogroups, one (clade B) with only vertebrate genes in (the others lost post-duplication) and the other (clade A) with Deuterostomes, Protostomes & Cnidaria. Clade A has 100% bootstrap support, providing evidence that the duplication predated the orthogroup and that the clade B genes should be excluded. Clade A also has 100% bootstrap support in the tree from the original study. Arguing against this, the C. elegans gene is outside the well supported Clade A in the newly inferred tree whereas an earlier version of the gene model has it inside the well-supported clade A in the original RefOG tree (WBGene00001249.1 = W09C2.1a). This makes the status of the C. elegans gene uncertain, and potentially that of the Clade B genes.

A new tree (v2) has been inferred focusing on just the metazoan level orthogroup and rooted on Mnemiopsis_leidyi_ML409810a-PA & Trichoplax_adhaerens_TriadP56374 (the exact root is not clear, but doesn't affect the subsequent analysis). In this tree the C. elegans gene is part of the Clade B this time, despite 100% bootstrap support against this in the other two trees. Given that the bootstrap support values do not provide the confidence they would otherwise suggest, and given that the previous study identified clades A & B making up the orthogroup (which is at least a reasonable interpretation that matches the patterns of species presence in the appropriate sub-trees), both clades will be included in the orthogroup in this study. This is with low certainty.
