The RefOG tree was rooted on a Nematostella vectensis gene.

The inferred tree contained the target orthogroup and a closely related clade which may be from the orthogroup or may be a closely related one, and then further orthogroup(s) separated by an ancient duplication from the target orthogroup. The presence of outgroup species bounding each of these clades confirmed that the duplication was ancient. The tree was rooted on the branch of this ancient duplication. 

The inferred tree confirms the analysis from the original study in large part. The only gene in question is Ciona_intestinalis_ENSCINP00000003738. The inferred tree shows it as part of the second most closely related orthogroup to the target orthogroup, with these three orthogroups having diverging prior to the divergence of Trichoplax adhaerens from the remaining species.. 

The RefOG tree provides no evidence either way for this gene. If it were inside the orthogroup or outside the orthogroup both cases would produce the observed tree when rooted on the Nematostella as a result of the limited genes included in the tree since there are no earlier diverging genes which would allow these two possibilities to be distinguished between. The newly inferred tree does include such genes. The topology indicates that there was a duplication before the base of the orthogroup which gave rise to a Ciona gene and Branchiostoma lanceolatum gene. This would require a loss at the base of the Protostomes and another at the base of the vertebrates. Since there are already Ciona and Branchiostoma genes already in the orthogroup a duplication would similarly be required if these genes were part of the orthogroup followed a loss prior to the vertebrates. To place these genes in the orthogroup would involve contradicting a series of 4 bipartitions with high bootstrap support: 97%, 93% 100% and 100%. With this considered, these genes are unlikely to be part of the target orthogroup, but to have diverged earlier as show by the inferred tree.


