The data from the original study does not include a tree from RefOG065, the tree labelled as such is a duplicate of the tree for RefOG002. Nevertheless, the HMM profile is correct.

The newly inferred tree (v1) contains the target orthogroup together with outgroup species and shows two or more gene duplication events prior to the MRCA of the Metazoa. It has been rooted at the base of the metazoan-level orthogroup containing the target bilaterian orthogroup. It shows a clade of almost entirely single-copy genes with representatives from all but 2 of the 12 species. The presence of the 3 outgroup species genes together in the tree but not at the root of the metazoan-level orthogroup suggests the long branch from the distant metazoan orthogroup may not have intersected the short branches at the root of the orthogroup of interest. A new tree was inferred on just the metazoan-level orthogroup containing the target bilaterian orthogroup.

This second tree (v2) has been rooted on the Mnemiopsis gene, the first diverging species and reproduces the expected topology, confirming the hypothesis for the initial tree. The orthogroup is fairly straightforward, the only question with respect to genes from the 12 species of interest is Drosophila_melanogaster_FBpp0081863. A literal reading of the tree shows with (only) 49% bootstrap support that it diverged prior to the origin of the orthogroup. There has been a gene duplication event near the root since there are two Drosophila genes. There are also two Branchiostoma genes. The best interpretation is that there was a duplication prior to the origin of the orthogroup, since the multiple copies are seen in both the Protostomes and Deuterostomes, and then losses in each of these clades. Thus Branchiostoma_lanceolatum_BL00270_evm0 and Drosophila_melanogaster_FBpp0081863 are from a separate orthogroup. This more closely matches the topology of the tree than two separate gene duplication events (and losses) within the orthogroup. This is with only with low confidence. 

