The RefOG tree is unrooted. It shows two clades separated by a duplication either before the bilaterian common ancestor (and hence actually made up of two orthogroups) or after the divergence of the Protostomes from the Deuterostomes (and hence a single orthogroup). It contains a single Nematostella gene, on which the tree has now been rooted. This clearly shows the two clades. 

The newly inferred tree (v1) extends much further across the gene family so as to give a clearer picture of the target orthogroup in its larger context. It shows at least three metazoan-level orthogroups. It has been rooted at the base of the metazoan orthogroup containing the target bilaterian-level orthogroup. This clade contains two genes from the Ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi (the earliest diverging species included) as well as representatives from Nematostella and Trichoplax. The tree shows that the RefOG from the previous study may be a single bilaterian-level orthogroup or may be two. The tree has been used to select a more focused set of (68) genes including these one or two bilaterian orthogroups plus the outgroup species.

This second tree (v2) has been rooted on the two Mnemiopsis leidyi genes. The presence of 4 genes from some early-branching but in-group species in a clade with Trichoplax adhaerens & Nematostella vectensis does not affect the following interpretation of the target orthogroup. They are most likely non-separable from the true outgroup due to the difficulty of resolving these earliest branches. This complication is avoided by the tree from the previous study only due to the use of a single gene. The newly inferred tree has on average higher bootstrap support as well as better species sampling.

Whether the two clades belong to the same or different bilaterian orthogroups depends on whether the duplication occurred before or after the divergence of the Protostomes from the Deuterostomes. One of the clades has both Protostomes and Deuterostomes as well as the earlier diverging Nematostella. This suggests these are two orthogroups, unless the tree inference is in error and these genes in fact diverged before the duplication. This possibility has to be considered since there are only Deuterostomes in the second clade. The first clade has 88% bootstrap support. This is strong but not overwhelming evidence, but the topology is the only evidence there is and it is favour of these clades being separate orthogroups. The RefOG has thus been identified as only the clade containing the gene Drosophila_melanogaster_FBpp0112980. This is more likely correct than incorrect, but with low confidence.

